[Music]
welcome to the second session on shell
programming
in this session we will look at some
more features of bash scripts
and you can
try them out
watching what i am doing and then
copying those codes modifying them and
adapting them to your needs
so let us get started with the
features in bash scripts that
go beyond what we have covered in the
previous session
there is nothing really called as
debugging a shell script
what is of course possible is to set the
minus x option
either at the bash prompt
or inside the script so that
every command that is executed is first
printed out
and then the output is shown
so in situations where there is a loop
and multiple conditions
then this option could help you in
identifying if there was any behavior
that you were not expecting you can
combine multiple
test conditions
for the loops by using the double
ampersand or the double pipe symbol
and these behave similar to what we have
discussed earlier namely that the double
ampersand would work
as the logical and operator the double
pipe would work as the logical r
operator
so the cost condition that is shown here
would work for the values of the
variable a
such as 4 5 and 6.
let us try this out on the shell prompt
using a example script and see
the script that we would be using to
practice the combination of test
conditions
is shown here
so we are looping
through the values of i from 1 to 9
and then we are printing that value
after that we are checking for the value
of i
either it is less than 3 less than or
equal to 3 or it is greater than or
equal to 7 in that case
it says i is out of range and if it
happens to be greater than 3 or less
than 7 then i is in the range so when we
execute that
you can see the behavior
as expected
1 2
are out of the range because less than
or equal to
then 4 5 6 are within the range and
again 7 8 9 are out of the range so you
can see that one can combine the
conditions in this manner by using the
double pipe for r or double ampersand
for and
and you can also see that we are doing
nesting of loops which
is quite straight forward any set of
commands can as well be other loops
and ensure that you have
closed the loops
properly
so that there's no confusion later on
when you want to read your own code
so indenting always helps
in identifying
which loop is ending where in your bash
script
though the shell environment is
originally meant
for running system commands
working with files
network operations and so on
sometimes we also need to do some
arithmetic inside the shell
and there are plenty of such
possibilities
here on the screen you are seeing four
different such possibilities
one is using the let command
where you could give the
expression
performing an arithmetic operation
either without course or with course
if you are doing it without quotes then
spaces should not be
inserted on either sides of the
equal to sign
because that is same as assigning value
to a variable at the shell prompt
and in case you are using quotes then
you can give
spaces on either sides of the equal to
sign to make your expression more
legible
there is also a construction
which goes with the square brackets
after the dollar
and you can write an expression inside
that
and
an example is here where dollar a plus
10 is evaluated
and the
output is then assigned to the variable
b
expr is yet another command like the let
command
which would actually perform the
arithmetic operation and print the
output
like any other command
which can be executed and the output can
be assigned to a variable
the command substitution operation
available with the dollar
followed by parenthesis can be used also
with expr command
very often expr is used on the shell to
just display the output of the operation
but you can also assign it to a variable
and you can also use the double
parenthesis
notation where you can give arithmetic
operation within the double parenthesis
and
there's a rich set of operators
available for this construction
if you give this expression without the
dollar
then it means that you are not intending
to
return the value to be assigned to
another variable
so operators such as the plus plus or
minus minus could be used to increment
or decrement a variable very elegantly
by using the double parenthesis operator
now you can see that there is a very
rich set of arithmetic operations that
are possible
so let us go ahead and see what are the
various operations available
using the expr command because that is
the most widely used
command in the batch scripts to perform
arithmetic operations
so you could use the plus minus
star and forward slash to perform the
sum difference product and quotient
operations
and remember these are all only for
integer operations
if you wanted floating point operations
you must use the bench calculator which
we would also look at in this exercise
the percent operator is meant to take
the remainder
be greater than or greater than equal to
or less than or less than equal to
r equal to or not equal to these are the
operators which are actually not going
to look at the
actual values of a and b
but
to perform a logical comparison and
return a value of 1 or 0 depending upon
the particular operation for example a
greater than b would return 1 if a is
actually larger in magnitude than b
otherwise it would return 0
a greater than or equal to b would
return 1 if the numerical value of a is
greater than or equal to b otherwise it
would return 0 ok so on for all other
operators below
you also have a pipe operator where if
neither argument is null or 0 then a
will be returned otherwise b will be
returned
the ampersand operator
is going to return
a if neither argument is null or 0
otherwise it will return actually zero
not b so you can see that there is a
subtle difference between the
pipe and ampersand operators
and then there are some operations
available with strings
so string colon regular expression can
be used
using the
basic regular expression engine
that is very limited set of regular
expressions
and
the position up to which such a matching
is possible would then be returned you
can use the command match
string and then the regular expression
to check if the
regular expression given is going to
match the string
and if so then whatever is matched is
then returned
substring
followed by string followed by two
integers would return
the substring from the string
starting
from the position n and
as long as m characters
so basically it is like taking a slice
of the string
by mentioning the position as well as
the length of the substring
you could also use the
index command
to check what is the first occurrence of
any of the characters listed in the
third argument
which are available in the string which
is precise in the
middle
you could also find out the length of a
string using the expression so expr
length string would give you the length
of the string
and there are also two special commands
available to override the default
behavior of keywords that are available
in the bash environment
so let us now look at
some of these examples
both the arithmetic
as well as expr commands
so let us look at an arithmetic example
here so we have a script arithmetic
example
where i am
checking for the number of arguments
and if it is less than 2
then i am
giving an error saying that it should be
used the script should be used with two
natural numbers as arguments
and then i have a regular expression
here
which looks for
the starting
of the
string
should be with the digit
and then any number of such digits and
then the string should be ending that
means that there should be nothing other
than digits in the string which means it
should be an integer
and
what i am doing here in this command is
this part is going to check
whether the first argument is going to
match the regular expression the
asterisk in the front is a negation
which means that i am asking
in case the first argument doesn't match
the regular expression
then we are giving an output saying that
first argument is not a natural number
and we are repeating the same thing for
the second argument also so what i am
doing is basically i am checking whether
the first and second arguments are
natural numbers or not
and if they are not then i am exiting so
that we are not proceeding further with
the script
and if they are
natural numbers then what we are doing
here is using the let command we are
finding the product of the two numbers
and
printing that product out
after that we are actually incrementing
the product by one number using the plus
plus operator using the double
parenthesis option and then displaying
that value also below
and then we also have the
one more operation where we are using
the power
function so the first argument raised to
the power of the second argument
and that is also displayed to show the
possibilities of operators using the let
command
after that the
square bracket
as a feature for the arithmetic
operations is shown here we take the sum
of the two arguments and add 10 to it
and then we also use the expr command
here to show the value of
the two arguments ended
and 20
and then we also have
last
way of showing the arithmetics namely by
unity double
namely by using the double parenthesis
operators
so what we will do is that we will
execute this
when i execute it without any options
the output is used with two natural
numbers as arguments so here you see
that i have not given any argument so it
should come out by saying that i should
use two natural numbers so i will give
only one natural number so i will say
12 okay that's all and it still gives
that option because i have given only
one argument so now i will do one thing
i will actually give two arguments i
will give four as a second argument
and then it would go on to run okay now
this
regular expression check is now very
nice what you can do is for example asdf
and then 4
okay
you can see that
the first argument asdf is not a natural
number the second argument 4 is accepted
so let us say i i
let us say i
swap these two and you can see that
again it says that the second argument
is not acceptable first is accepted
so it is already checking for the
natural numbers and then only proceeding
further
so let us go ahead and
let it actually work with
the arguments which are natural numbers
and here i will actually also do the
so the very first
operation is to take the product and
echo that so you see that the product
has come 12 6 or 72 okay then the second
operator here is to increment it by 1
and then we are printing it saying that
product a incremented is dollar a so
that's what is saying here product a
incremented is 73 72 plus 1
and then we have the power operator here
b
so
12 raised to the power of
6 and that's coming out to be here
okay
and
the sum okay 12 plus
6 is being shown here plus 10 so
this is showing you 12 plus 6 plus 10
and you can see that is 28 here
and the last
arithmetic operation is
here the next operator is to add 20 to
the sum
so that is coming up here sum plus 20 is
38.
the last arithmetic operation is to take
the product of the two numbers and make
it twice
so you see that
12 into 6 72 into 2 144 okay so you can
see that you can perform arithmetic
operations using
very different
syntax of possibilities that are
available and you can choose whichever
is convenient to you
and go on to explore
numerics within the batch environment
remember that this is only for the
integers now
there is a bench calculator available
which you can load it with the minus l
option to load the math library and you
can perform some operations here so 12
raised to the power of 6 you can see
that it is giving you a number 298
598 4 which is actually matching what is
here
so you could also do these things with
a
floating point number
so that would work with floating point
operations also okay so
so so if you want to do floating point
operations or
exponentials of real numbers then you
could also use the bench calculator
so look at the man bc so it's an
arbitrary precision calculator very
powerful so we can also use this within
the shell scripts if you want to do
those kind of arithmetics now let us
explore the expr functionality
so in the expr functionality i have got
a long list of commands where we are
testing out every single operation but i
am also telling you how to actually use
that without confusing the shell by
using the characters which are special
to the shell ok so we are actually
showing all these things and here i have
put the set minus x option
so that you can actually run it with the
debugging
namely to just display the command
before you
run it
so you can see that it has
gone very long so every time a command
is run there is a character plus that is
kept in front and the output alone will
be without the plus in the front so i
have done three commands here assigning
values of
a and b and c
and then i am running
exp256 plus 4
and you see that it gives you the answer
here okay and 26 256 minus 4 the answer
is here 256 multiplied by 4 answer is
here 256 divided by 4 answer is here now
you can see that from the script
the way we have given the multiplication
is with a backslash to escape that okay
so that let us remember that
okay and then ah
you can see that when we come to
operations which involve
greater than symbol or greater than
equal to the
answers are actually 1 or 0 okay so you
can say if you are asking 256 greater
than 4 is it true yes so answer is 1
4 is greater than or equal to 256 answer
is false so answer is 0
similarly you are asking is it less 256
less than 4
okay
and answer is 0
is 4 less than or equal to 256 answer is
yes 1
okay and is 256 equal to 4 answer is no
and not equal to answer is yes 1
and the pipe symbol if the both
arguments are available then the first
argument is returned so you see that 256
is the answer that is the first argument
an ampersand symbol is when also you
have got the similar kind of a behavior
ok only when you look at the second
argument
then you have a difference there okay if
it is false
and then we are also looking at this
string operations if you have a string
expression
the first string colon the second string
so let us look at how is it specified
you can see here
expression string colon
and then the regular expression so i am
placing the string here in a course
because if you don't do that
then the expression will take only
octavio as the first part of the string
and then it is expecting some command
after that like a colon but then
something else has come there so it will
have a problem so we are quoting the
string within
double quotes here so that that part
will not be having an error and then the
regular expression is shown here what is
a regular expression i am expecting a
word
at the beginning of the string to start
either with a small letter or a capital
letter and it should be sounding like
either octave or octavio
okay so both will be accepted now this
regular expression search with the expr
is an anchored search that is it will be
searching only from the beginning of the
string so you should not search for
something is it which is in the part of
the string but not but only at the
beginning of the string okay so when we
did that you can see that ah when i am
asking it to match you can see octavio
has been matched and you can see that
seven characters so the answer is seven
so it is telling that up to the seventh
character there is a match available
with the regular expression that is
provided the irregular expression
provided is
within the
limits of the bre engine so no plus sign
for example and it is fitting what is
there in the beginning of the string so
the answer is 7
next we are asking what is the substring
okay so here i am asking what is the
substring of whatever is provided as a
string
and
starting from the first position and for
the six characters okay so that would be
here if you see here
substring of whatever string is provided
starting from the first character up to
six characters so that would be just
octa v okay and that has been returned
so you can
chop off a part of the string and
written it
similarly you can also ask index
that is any of the two characters that
are provided where is the first
occurrence of any of those characters so
if you look at from the beginning the
very first occurrence is v
which is at the fifth position so the
answer is five okay so you can actually
expand these two character to something
else also
and then the length of the string also
can be measured using expr length
followed by the string and the answer is
39 so what we will do is now we will go
and edit this
script
and we remove the debugging option we
don't need that
and here what we would do is
look for the strings which are slightly
different so i would put it as j
and then
s okay j and s
and here instead of starting with 1 i
would start with
8 and go up to 8 characters
okay
so let us go ahead and try this out
and you see that
the answer here is version okay so if
you see here when we start
when we start at the eighth character
then version followed by a space is the
answer and that has been written here
okay and then
look at the last commands js i am asking
the position okay and if you look at the
j position and s position the very first
occurrence is actually of s
and that would occur here for example
this is 7 8 9 10 11 12. so it's
occurring at the 12th position okay so
you can see that's why the answer is 12.
and then
the last thing is about the length of
the string that is 39 same as what we
have seen earlier
so
ah just look at this
script once more so you can see that we
are able to check
the various operators so some operators
are slightly specially given so so that
we escape the meaning so you also escape
the meaning of the greater than symbol
as well as the less than symbol because
they have special meaning in the shell
so we have put those backslashes there
and the pipe also has a special meaning
ampersand also special meaning so we are
also escaping them other than that by
and large the
syntax of expr is exactly how i have
shown in the slides so you can see that
fairly rich
set of operators are available using
expr command and also numerics are
possible with four different syntaxes so
you can go ahead and try that out as
part of your shell scripts
now there is a interesting feature
called here doc feature what it means is
that when you have the requirement to
give a long string
with the
special characters inside or maybe line
breaks etc then you do not have to
struggle
by introducing the backslash n
are coating and uncoating or escaping
some special characters etcetera so you
can just blindly type out whatever you
want to assign as a part of the long
string
and have a marker
so that the input is taken up to the
marker so on the left hand side you have
seen that the marker is eof which is a
default if you don't say anything that
means that eof is what it is expecting
up to the line in which the first
character is e and then the word is eof
the input is red and that input is then
fed
at the location that you are supposed to
be giving so bc minus l
followed by whatever is the text is
supposed to be inputted to the bc that
is actually given here scale is
corresponding to the precision of
calculation
and the operation that is done by bc is
actually take the sum of the first two
numbers and raise it to the third number
so you can see there is a floating point
operation and we are able to do that
within the shell script and getting a
floating point answer
by using this here doc feature so that
our code is readable
now sometimes you may want to make the
code readable slightly better by using
indentation
so if you want you can actually have a
tab character to indent the script but
you need to actually have a hyphen after
the two less than symbols for the marker
so that the tab characters are ignored
okay so this is important because there
are some commands this in this case it
is bc which doesn't bother about the tab
characters but there could be some
commands where the initial tab could be
a problem so if you want that to be
ignored
then it is important for you to mention
that there is a minus sign there so that
these are ignored
and then the marker actually can be
anything else so you can actually write
it as eyf or anything else
and you can indent the marker also
because you have actually given here
minus sign
so both these scripts will do the same
feature and we can just try that out
right away
so here is the example first example of
here doc
where we are having the input given to
the bc minus l
going up to here
and that is actually fed to the pc
and look at the output of that
and you see that the answer has come so
the calculation has been performed
within the batch script
now let us look at the second example
also
so here we have used the uh here doc
with a different
marker so the marker is not eof but it
is abc which is allowed okay
and
we have also used a minus symbol there
hyphen to indicate that we are actually
indenting the text
so that it is not expecting to see abc
at the beginning of the line but with
the same indentation
and this is going to be also accepted so
let us execute that
and you see that the same answer is what
we have seen now let us go ahead and
edit this
so that the
error will be shown so i forget to
include the minus option there minus the
hyphen symbol after the double less than
and you see that there is no syntax
highlighting that is happening for abc
already a hint that it is not likely to
work let us go ahead and try that out
and you see that there's a syntax error
because it was expecting to see the
marker and it was not finding that okay
and
when we put that minus sign
then syntax highlighting also shows that
everything is fine now the marker also
we could change so i will change it to
say blah okay
and go on to execute that
and you see that that works out quite
fine okay
so
you can see that the marker is very
useful in keeping the code quite neat
and also indented so that you can
actually give a multi-line input to any
command and using the command
substitution we are
getting the output of the bc command and
then writing it to d
variable and then printing that variable
out so you can perform floating point
operations within the shell okay now we
have done some arithmetic and we have
also seen how this can be done ah we
have also seen how you can
do some special operations like
increment so let us go ahead and see
whether we can explore the so called
path variable because it is a very
important variable because as i
mentioned we should keep our shell
scripts in some specific directory so if
it is available in the path it's good
you can use the commands without the
path prepending the script name so let
us try that out
so the path example is here so what are
we doing
we are actually setting the minus x
option to see what is happening
and what we are doing here is ifs is
equal to colon so we are actually cell
setting the
internal field separator value as colon
so the path variable if you see
the directories are all listed one after
other by separating with a colon symbol
so i am saying that ifs is color for n
in path so if ifs is colon which means
that all these directory names are
individual fields so then it's like an
array and therefore for n in the list of
directories as an array separated by
colon what we are doing is we are
actually printing
a number integer followed by the
directory and then we are actually
incrementing that number
by one each time we are printing so
from our knowledge of arithmetic
operations we know that i value is just
going up one every time the loop is
running and then the directory name is
being printed so we are actually able to
see what is the sequence by which the
path will be searched directly after
directory so let us just check how does
this work
and you see that
the minus x option is actually telling
you whatever it is doing
and the very first
is zero
now the very first directory is this one
the second one is this one the third one
is this one and so on okay now i will go
and disable that option and show you in
a neat fashion how this option how the
output looks like so here you can see
that the script without the debugging
option shows you that we are starting at
zero and some zero onwards what is the
sequence of directories which will be
searched in the path variable okay so we
have achieved this by uh using the
arithmetic operation to print the number
in the front
and splitting the directories is done by
ifs is equal to colon and then we are
using the for loop as if the dollar path
is basically an array almost so if you
have ifs is equal to colon it is as good
as an array and then we are going and
looking at those segments so you can do
that with any
a line that contains a specific field
separator and then you can treat each of
those segments as fields and inspect
them and do some operation